# Room Version 1

This room version is the first ever version for rooms, and contains the
building blocks for other room versions.

## Client considerations

Clients which implement the redaction algorithm locally should refer to the
redactions[redactions](/v1.18/rooms/v1/#redactions) section below.

### Redactions

Upon receipt of a redaction event, the server must strip off any keys
not in the following list:


- `event_id`

- `type`

- `room_id`

- `sender`

- `state_key`

- `content`

- `hashes`

- `signatures`

- `depth`

- `prev_events`

- `prev_state`

- `auth_events`

- `origin`

- `origin_server_ts`

- `membership`


The content object must also be stripped of all keys, unless it is one
of the following event types:


- `m.room.member`[m.room.member](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroommember) allows key `membership`.

- `m.room.create`[m.room.create](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomcreate) allows key `creator`.

- `m.room.join_rules`[m.room.join_rules](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomjoin_rules) allows key `join_rule`.

- `m.room.power_levels`[m.room.power_levels](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroompower_levels) allows keys
`ban`, `events`, `events_default`, `kick`, `redact`, `state_default`, `users`,
`users_default`.

- `m.room.aliases`[m.room.aliases](/v1.18/client-server-api/#historical-events) allows key `aliases`.

- `m.room.history_visibility`[m.room.history_visibility](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomhistory_visibility) allows
key `history_visibility`.


## Server implementation components

The information contained in this section is strictly for server
implementors. Applications which use the Client-Server API are generally
unaffected by the intricacies contained here. The section above
regarding client considerations is the resource that Client-Server API
use cases should reference.

The algorithms defined here should only apply to version 1 rooms. Other
algorithms may be used by other room versions, and as such servers
should be aware of which version room they are dealing with prior to
executing a given algorithm.

Although there are many rooms using room version 1, it is known to have
undesirable effects. Servers implementing support for room version 1
should be aware that restrictions should be generally relaxed and that
inconsistencies may occur.

### Redactions

See above[See above](/v1.18/rooms/v1/#redactions).

### Event IDs

An event has exactly one event ID. Event IDs in this room version have the
format:

```
$opaque_id:domain
```


where `domain` is the server name[server name](/v1.18/appendices/#server-name) of the homeserver
which created the room, and `opaque_id` is a locally-unique string.

The domain is used only for namespacing to avoid the risk of clashes of
identifiers between different homeservers. There is no implication that the
room or event in question is still available at the corresponding homeserver.

### Event format

Events in version 1 rooms have the following structure:

# 
 `Persistent Data Unit`


---

A persistent data unit (event) for room versions 1 and 2.

Persistent Data Unit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 | Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `auth_events` | `[[string\|Event HashEvent Hash]]` | **Required: **Event IDs and reference hashes for the authorization events that would allow this event to be in the room. Must contain less than or equal to 10 events. Note that if the relevant auth event selection rules are used, this restriction should never be encountered. |
| `content` | `object` | **Required: **The content of the event. |
| `depth` | `integer` | **Required: **The maximum depth of the `prev_events`, plus one. Must be less than the maximum value for an integer (2^63 - 1). If the room’s depth is already at the limit, the depth must be set to the limit. |
| `event_id` | `string` | **Required: **The event ID for the PDU. |
| `hashes` | `Event HashEvent Hash` | **Required: **Content hashes of the PDU, following the algorithm specified in Signing Events[Signing Events](/v1.18/server-server-api/#signing-events). |
| `origin_server_ts` | `integer` | **Required: **Timestamp in milliseconds on origin homeserver when this event was created. |
| `prev_events` | `[[string\|Event HashEvent Hash]]` | **Required: **Event IDs and reference hashes for the most recent events in the room that the homeserver was aware of when it made this event. Must contain less than or equal to 20 events. |
| `redacts` | `string` | For redaction events, the ID of the event being redacted. |
| `room_id` | `string` | **Required: **Room identifier. |
| `sender` | `string` | **Required: **The ID of the user sending the event. |
| `signatures` | `{string: {string: string}}` | **Required: **Signatures for the PDU, following the algorithm specified in Signing Events[Signing Events](/v1.18/server-server-api/#signing-events). |
| `state_key` | `string` | If this key is present, the event is a state event, and it will replace previous events with the same `type` and `state_key` in the room state. |
| `type` | `string` | **Required: **Event type |
| `unsigned` | `UnsignedDataUnsignedData` | Additional data added by the origin server but not covered by the `signatures`. |


Event Hash
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 | Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `sha256` | `string` | **Required: **The hash. |


UnsignedData
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 | Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `age` | `integer` | The number of milliseconds that have passed since this message was sent. |


## Examples

```
{
  "auth_events": [
    [
      "$af232176:example.org",
      {
        "sha256": "abase64encodedsha256hashshouldbe43byteslong"
      }
    ]
  ],
  "content": {
    "key": "value"
  },
  "depth": 12,
  "event_id": "$a4ecee13e2accdadf56c1025:example.com",
  "hashes": {
    "sha256": "thishashcoversallfieldsincasethisisredacted"
  },
  "origin_server_ts": 1404838188000,
  "prev_events": [
    [
      "$af232176:example.org",
      {
        "sha256": "abase64encodedsha256hashshouldbe43byteslong"
      }
    ]
  ],
  "room_id": "!UcYsUzyxTGDxLBEvLy:example.org",
  "sender": "@alice:example.com",
  "signatures": {
    "example.com": {
      "ed25519:key_version": "these86bytesofbase64signaturecoveressentialfieldsincludinghashessocancheckredactedpdus"
    }
  },
  "type": "m.room.message",
  "unsigned": {
    "age": 4612
  }
}
```


#### Deprecated event content schemas

Events sent into rooms of this version can have formats which are different
from their normal schema. Those cases are documented here.

The behaviour described here is preserved strictly for backwards compatibility
only. A homeserver should take reasonable precautions to prevent users from
sending these so-called “malformed” events, and must never rely on the behaviours
described here as a default.

##### `m.room.power_levels` events accept values as strings

In order to maintain backwards compatibility with early implementations,
each of the integer-valued properties within
`m.room.power_levels`[m.room.power_levels](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroompower_levels) events can
be encoded as strings instead of integers. This includes the nested values
within the `events`, `notifications` and `users` properties.
For example, the following is a valid `m.room.power_levels` event in this room version:

```
{
  "content": {
    "ban": "50",
    "events": {
      "m.room.power_levels": "100"
    },
    "events_default": "0",
    "state_default": "50",
    "users": {
      "@example:localhost": "100"
    },
    "users_default": "0"
  },
  "origin_server_ts": 1432735824653,
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  "sender": "@example:example.org",
  "state_key": "",
  "type": "m.room.power_levels"
}
```


When the value is representative of an integer, they must be the following format:


- a single base 10 integer, no float values or decimal points, optionally with
any number of leading zeroes (`"100"`, `"000100"`);

- optionally prefixed with a single `-` or `+` character before the integer (`"+100"`,
`"-100"`).

- optionally with any number of leading or trailing whitespace characters (`" 100 "`,
`" 00100 "`, `" +100 "`, `" -100 "`);


##### `m.room.power_levels` events accept values as floats

When the value is a float


- First, exponential notation is applied: `5.114698E4` becomes `51146.98`

- Second, the value is truncated at the decimal point: `51146.98` becomes `51146`.


Values outside the range represented by IEE754 binary64 (a “double”) cause the
powerlevel event to be rejected, as do `Infinity`, `-Infinity` and `NaN`.

For example, this is a valid `m.room.power_levels` event in this room version:

```
{
  "content": {
    "ban": 50,
    "events": {
      "m.room.power_levels": 100
    },
    "events_default": 0,
    "state_default": 50,
    "users": {
      "@example:example.org": 100,
      "@alice:localhost": 50,
      "@bob:localhost": 50.57
    },
    "users_default": 0
  },
  "origin_server_ts": 1432735824653,
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  "sender": "@example:example.org",
  "state_key": "",
  "type": "m.room.power_levels"
}
```


In this example, both `@bob:localhost` and `@alice:localhost` have the same effective
power level of `50`, even though the values are technically different.

Note that, since this room version does not enforce that events comply with the requirements
of Canonical JSON[Canonical JSON](/v1.18/appendices/#canonical-json), power levels can be formatted as floats.

### Authorization rules

The types of state events that affect authorization are:


- `m.room.create`[m.room.create](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomcreate)

- `m.room.member`[m.room.member](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroommember)

- `m.room.join_rules`[m.room.join_rules](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomjoin_rules)

- `m.room.power_levels`[m.room.power_levels](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroompower_levels)

- `m.room.third_party_invite`[m.room.third_party_invite](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomthird_party_invite)


Power levels are inferred from defaults when not explicitly supplied.
For example, mentions of the `sender`’s power level can also refer to
the default power level for users in the room.

The rules are as follows:


1. If type is `m.room.create`:


  1. If it has any `prev_events`, reject.

  2. If the domain of the `room_id` does not match the domain of the
`sender`, reject.

  3. If `content.room_version` is present and is not a recognised
version, reject.

  4. If `content` has no `creator` property, reject.

  5. Otherwise, allow.


2. Considering the event’s `auth_events`:


  1. 


If there are duplicate entries for a given `type` and `state_key` pair,
reject.


  2. 


If there are entries whose `type` and `state_key` don’t match those
specified by the auth events
selection[auth events
selection](/v1.18/server-server-api/#auth-events-selection)
algorithm described in the server specification, reject.

**Note**: This room version requires an `m.room.create` event to be selected.


  3. 


If there are entries which were themselves rejected under the checks
performed on receipt of a
PDU[checks
performed on receipt of a
PDU](/v1.18/server-server-api/#checks-performed-on-receipt-of-a-pdu), reject.


  4. 


If there is no `m.room.create` event among the entries, reject.


  5. 


If any event in `auth_events` has a `room_id` which does not match that of
the event being authorised, reject.


3. If the `content` of the `m.room.create` event in the room state has the
property `m.federate` set to `false`, and the `sender` domain of the event
does not match the `sender` domain of the create event, reject.

4. If type is `m.room.aliases`:


  1. If event has no `state_key`, reject.

  2. If sender’s domain doesn’t match `state_key`, reject.

  3. Otherwise, allow.


5. If type is `m.room.member`:


  1. If there is no `state_key` property, or no `membership` property in
`content`, reject.

  2. If `membership` is `join`:


    1. If the only previous event is an `m.room.create` and the
`state_key` is the creator, allow.

    2. If the `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.

    3. If the `sender` is banned, reject.

    4. If the `join_rule` is `invite` then allow if membership
state is `invite` or `join`.

    5. If the `join_rule` is `public`, allow.

    6. Otherwise, reject.


  3. If `membership` is `invite`:


    1. If `content` has a `third_party_invite` property:


      1. If *target user* is banned, reject.

      2. If `content.third_party_invite` does not have a `signed`
property, reject.

      3. If `signed` does not have `mxid` and `token` properties,
reject.

      4. If `mxid` does not match `state_key`, reject.

      5. If there is no `m.room.third_party_invite` event in the
current room state with `state_key` matching `token`,
reject.

      6. If `sender` does not match `sender` of the
`m.room.third_party_invite`, reject.

      7. If any signature in `signed` matches any public key in
the `m.room.third_party_invite` event, allow. The public
keys are in `content` of `m.room.third_party_invite` as:


        1. A single public key in the `public_key` property.

        2. A list of public keys in the `public_keys` property.


      8. Otherwise, reject.


    2. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`,
reject.

    3. If *target user*’s current membership state is `join` or
`ban`, reject.

    4. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to
the *invite level*, allow.

    5. Otherwise, reject.


  4. If `membership` is `leave`:


    1. If the `sender` matches `state_key`, allow if and only if
that user’s current membership state is `invite` or `join`.

    2. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`,
reject.

    3. If the *target user*’s current membership state is `ban`,
and the `sender`’s power level is less than the *ban level*,
reject.

    4. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to
the *kick level*, and the *target user*’s power level is
less than the `sender`’s power level, allow.

    5. Otherwise, reject.


  5. If `membership` is `ban`:


    1. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`,
reject.

    2. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to
the *ban level*, and the *target user*’s power level is less
than the `sender`’s power level, allow.

    3. Otherwise, reject.


  6. Otherwise, the membership is unknown. Reject.


6. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`, reject.

7. If type is `m.room.third_party_invite`:


  1. Allow if and only if `sender`’s current power level is greater
than or equal to the *invite level*.


8. If the event type’s *required power level* is greater than the
`sender`’s power level, reject.

9. If the event has a `state_key` that starts with an `@` and does not
match the `sender`, reject.

10. If type is `m.room.power_levels`:


  1. If the `users` property in `content` is not an object with keys that
are valid user IDs with values that are integers (or a string
that is an integer), reject.

  2. If there is no previous `m.room.power_levels` event in the room,
allow.

  3. For the properties `users_default`, `events_default`, `state_default`,
`ban`, `redact`, `kick`, `invite` check if they were added,
changed or removed. For each found alteration:


    1. If the current value is greater than the `sender`’s current
power level, reject.

    2. If the new value is greater than the `sender`’s current power
level, reject.


  4. For each entry being changed in, or removed from, the `events` property:


    1. If the current value is greater than the `sender`’s current
power level, reject.


  5. For each entry being added to, or changed in, the `events` property:


    1. If the new value is greater than the `sender`’s current power
level, reject.


  6. For each entry being changed in, or removed from, the `users` property,
other than the `sender`’s own entry:


    1. If the current value is greater than or equal to the `sender`’s
current power level, reject.


  7. For each entry being added to, or changed in, the `users` property:


    1. If the new value is greater than the `sender`’s current power
level, reject.


  8. Otherwise, allow.


11. If type is `m.room.redaction`:


  1. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to the
*redact level*, allow.

  2. If the domain of the `event_id` of the event being redacted is
the same as the domain of the `event_id` of the
`m.room.redaction`, allow.

  3. Otherwise, reject.


12. Otherwise, allow.


Some consequences of these rules:


- Unless you are a member of the room, the only permitted operations
(apart from the initial create/join) are: joining a public room;
accepting or rejecting an invitation to a room.

- To unban somebody, you must have power level greater than or equal
to both the kick *and* ban levels, *and* greater than the target
user’s power level.


### State resolution

Room version 1 is known to have bugs that can cause the state of rooms
to reset to older versions of the room’s state. For example this could
mean that users who had joined the room may be removed from the room,
admins and moderators could lose their power level, and users who have
been banned from the room may be able to rejoin. Other state events such
as the the room’s name or topic could also reset to a previous version.

This is fixed in the state resolution algorithm introduced in room
version 2.

The room state *S′*(*E*) after an event *E* is defined in terms of the
room state *S*(*E*) before *E*, and depends on whether *E* is a state
event or a message event:


- If *E* is a message event, then *S′(E)* = *S(E)*.

- If *E* is a state event, then *S′(E)* is *S(E)*, except that its
entry corresponding to the `event_type` and `state_key` of *E* is
replaced by the `event_id` of *E*.


The room state *S(E)* before *E* is the *resolution* of the set of
states {*S′(E′)*, *S′(E″)*, …} after the `prev_events` {*E′*, *E″*, …}.
of *E*.

The *resolution* of a set of states is defined as follows. The resolved
state is built up in a number of passes; here we use *R* to refer to the
results of the resolution so far.


- Start by setting *R* to the union of the states to be resolved,
excluding any *conflicting* events.

- First we resolve conflicts between `m.room.power_levels` events. If
there is no conflict, this step is skipped, otherwise:


  - Assemble all the `m.room.power_levels` events from the states to
be resolved into a list.

  - Sort the list by ascending `depth` then descending
`sha1(event_id)`.

  - Add the first event in the list to *R*.

  - For each subsequent event in the list, check that the event
would be allowed by the authorization rules for a room in state
*R*. If the event would be allowed, then update *R* with the
event and continue with the next event in the list. If it would
not be allowed, stop and continue below with `m.room.join_rules`
events.


- Repeat the above process for conflicts between `m.room.join_rules`
events.

- Repeat the above process for conflicts between `m.room.member`
events.

- No other events affect the authorization rules, so for all other
conflicts, just pick the event with the highest depth and lowest
`sha1(event_id)` that passes authentication in *R* and add it to
*R*.


A *conflict* occurs between states where those states have different
`event_ids` for the same `(event_type, state_key)`. The events thus
affected are said to be *conflicting* events.

### Canonical JSON

Servers MUST NOT strictly enforce the JSON format specified in the
appendices[appendices](/v1.18/appendices/#canonical-json) for the reasons
described there.
