# Room Version 2

This room version builds on version 1[version 1](/v1.18/rooms/v1/) with an improved
state resolution algorithm.

## Client considerations

There are no client considerations introduced in this room version. Clients
which implement the redaction algorithm locally should refer to the
redactions[redactions](/v1.18/rooms/v2/#redactions) section below for a full overview of the algorithm.

## Server implementation components

The information contained in this section is strictly for server
implementors. Applications which use the Client-Server API are generally
unaffected by the details contained here, and can safely ignore their
presence.

Room version 2 uses the base components of room version 1[room version 1](/v1.18/rooms/v1/),
changing only the state resolution algorithm.

### State resolution

**[New in this version]**

The room state *S′(E)* after an event *E* is defined in terms of the
room state *S(E)* before *E*, and depends on whether *E* is a state
event or a message event:


- If *E* is a message event, then *S′(E)* = *S(E)*.

- If *E* is a state event, then *S′(E)* is *S(E)*, except that its
entry corresponding to the `event_type` and `state_key` of *E* is
replaced by the `event_id` of *E*.


The room state *S(E)* before *E* is the *resolution* of the set of
states {*S′(E*1*)*, *S′(E*2*)*, …}
after the `prev_event`s {*E*1, *E*2, …} of *E*.
The resolution of a set of states is given in the algorithm below.

#### Definitions

The state resolution algorithm for version 2 rooms uses the following
definitions, given the set of room states
{*S*1, *S*2, …}:

**Power events.**
A *power event* is a state event with type `m.room.power_levels` or
`m.room.join_rules`, or a state event with type `m.room.member` where
the `membership` is `leave` or `ban` and the `sender` does not match the
`state_key`. The idea behind this is that power events are events that
might remove someone’s ability to do something in the room.

**Unconflicted state map and conflicted state set.**
The keys of the state maps *Si* are 2-tuples of strings of the form
*K* = `(event_type, state_key)`. The values *V* are state events.
The key-value pairs (*K*, *V*) across all state maps *Si* can be
divided into two collections.
If a given key *K* is present in every *Si* with the same value *V*
in each state map, then the pair (*K*, *V*) belongs to the *unconflicted state map*.
Otherwise, *V* belongs to the *conflicted state set*.

Note that the unconflicted state map only has one event for each key *K*,
whereas the conflicted state set may contain multiple events with the same key.

**Auth chain.**
The *auth chain* of an event *E* is the set containing all of *E*’s auth events,
all of *their* auth events, and so on recursively, stretching back to the
start of the room. Put differently, these are the events reachable by walking
the graph induced by an event’s `auth_events` links.

**Auth difference.**
The *auth difference* is calculated by first calculating the full auth
chain for each state *S**i*, that is the union of the auth
chains for each event in *S**i*, and then taking every event
that doesn’t appear in every auth chain. If *C**i* is the
full auth chain of *S**i*, then the auth difference is
∪ *C**i* − ∩ *C**i*.

**Full conflicted set.**
The *full conflicted set* is the union of the conflicted state set and
the auth difference.

**Reverse topological power ordering.**
The *reverse topological power ordering* of a set of events is the
lexicographically smallest topological ordering based on the DAG formed
by auth events. The reverse topological power ordering is ordered from
earliest event to latest. For comparing two topological orderings to
determine which is the lexicographically smallest, the following
comparison relation on events is used: for events *x* and *y*,
*x* < *y* if


1. *x*’s sender has *greater* power level than *y*’s sender, when
looking at their respective `auth_event`s; or

2. the senders have the same power level, but *x*’s `origin_server_ts`
is *less* than *y*’s `origin_server_ts`; or

3. the senders have the same power level and the events have the same
`origin_server_ts`, but *x*’s `event_id` is *less* than *y*’s
`event_id`.


The reverse topological power ordering can be found by sorting the
events using Kahn’s algorithm for topological sorting, and at each step
selecting, among all the candidate vertices, the smallest vertex using
the above comparison relation.

**Mainline ordering.**
Let *P* = *P*0 be an `m.room.power_levels` event.
Starting with *i* = 0, repeatedly fetch *P**i*+1, the
`m.room.power_levels` event in the `auth_events` of *Pi*.
Increment *i* and repeat until *Pi* has no `m.room.power_levels`
event in its `auth_events`.
The *mainline of P*0 is the list of events
[*P*0 , *P*1, … , *Pn*],
fetched in this way.

Let *e* = *e0* be another event (possibly another
`m.room.power_levels` event). We can compute a similar list of events
[*e*1, …, *em*],
where *e**j*+1 is the `m.room.power_levels` event in the
`auth_events` of *ej* and where *em* has no
`m.room.power_levels` event in its `auth_events`. (Note that the event we
started with, *e0*, is not included in this list. Also note that it
may be empty, because *e* may not cite an `m.room.power_levels` event in its
`auth_events` at all.)

Now compare these two lists as follows.


- Find the smallest index *j* ≥ 1 for which *ej* belongs to the
mainline of *P*.

- If such a *j* exists, then *ej* = *Pi* for some unique
index *i* ≥ 0. Otherwise set *i* = ∞, where ∞ is a sentinel value greater
than any integer.

- In both cases, the *mainline position* of *e* is *i*.


Given mainline positions calculated from *P*, the *mainline ordering based on* *P* of a set of events is the ordering,
from smallest to largest, using the following comparison relation on
events: for events *x* and *y*, *x* < *y* if


1. the mainline position of *x* is **greater** than
the mainline position of *y* (i.e. the auth chain of
*x* is based on an earlier event in the mainline than *y*); or

2. the mainline positions of the events are the same, but *x*’s
`origin_server_ts` is *less* than *y*’s `origin_server_ts`; or

3. the mainline positions of the events are the same and the events have the
same `origin_server_ts`, but *x*’s `event_id` is *less* than *y*’s
`event_id`.


**Iterative auth checks.**
The *iterative auth checks algorithm* takes as input an initial room
state and a sorted list of state events, and constructs a new room state
by iterating through the event list and applying the state event to the
room state if the state event is allowed by the authorization
rules[authorization
rules](/v1.18/server-server-api/#authorization-rules).
If the state event is not allowed by the authorization rules, then the
event is ignored. If a `(event_type, state_key)` key that is required
for checking the authorization rules is not present in the state, then
the appropriate state event from the event’s `auth_events` is used if
the auth event is not rejected.

#### Algorithm

The *resolution* of a set of states is obtained as follows:


1. Select the set *X* of all *power events* that appear in the *full
conflicted set*. For each such power event *P*, enlarge *X* by adding
the events in the auth chain of *P* which also belong to the full
conflicted set. Sort *X* into a list using the *reverse topological
power ordering*.

2. Apply the *iterative auth checks algorithm*, starting from the
*unconflicted state map*, to the list of events from the previous
step to get a partially resolved state.

3. Take all remaining events that weren’t picked in step 1 and order
them by the mainline ordering based on the power level in the
partially resolved state obtained in step 2.

4. Apply the *iterative auth checks algorithm* on the partial resolved
state and the list of events from the previous step.

5. Update the result by replacing any event with the event with the
same key from the *unconflicted state map*, if such an event exists,
to get the final resolved state.


#### Rejected events

Events that have been rejected due to failing auth based on the state at
the event (rather than based on their auth chain) are handled as usual
by the algorithm, unless otherwise specified.

Note that no events rejected due to failure to auth against their auth
chain should appear in the process, as they should not appear in state
(the algorithm only uses events that appear in either the state sets or
in the auth chain of the events in the state sets).

This helps ensure that different servers’ view of state is more likely
to converge, since rejection state of an event may be different. This
can happen if a third server gives an incorrect version of the state
when a server joins a room via it (either due to being faulty or
malicious). Convergence of state is a desirable property as it ensures
that all users in the room have a (mostly) consistent view of the state
of the room. If the view of the state on different servers diverges it
can lead to bifurcation of the room due to e.g. servers disagreeing on
who is in the room.

Intuitively, using rejected events feels dangerous, however:


1. Servers cannot arbitrarily make up state, since they still need to
pass the auth checks based on the event’s auth chain (e.g. they
can’t grant themselves power levels if they didn’t have them
before).

2. For a previously rejected event to pass auth there must be a set of
state that allows said event. A malicious server could therefore
produce a fork where it claims the state is that particular set of
state, duplicate the rejected event to point to that fork, and send
the event. The duplicated event would then pass the auth checks.
Ignoring rejected events would therefore not eliminate any potential
attack vectors.


Rejected auth events are deliberately excluded from use in the iterative
auth checks, as auth events aren’t re-authed (although non-auth events
are) during the iterative auth checks.

## Unchanged from v1

The following sections have not been modified since v1, but are included for
completeness.

### Redactions

Upon receipt of a redaction event, the server must strip off any keys
not in the following list:


- `event_id`

- `type`

- `room_id`

- `sender`

- `state_key`

- `content`

- `hashes`

- `signatures`

- `depth`

- `prev_events`

- `prev_state`

- `auth_events`

- `origin`

- `origin_server_ts`

- `membership`


The content object must also be stripped of all keys, unless it is one
of the following event types:


- `m.room.member`[m.room.member](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroommember) allows key `membership`.

- `m.room.create`[m.room.create](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomcreate) allows key `creator`.

- `m.room.join_rules`[m.room.join_rules](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomjoin_rules) allows key `join_rule`.

- `m.room.power_levels`[m.room.power_levels](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroompower_levels) allows keys
`ban`, `events`, `events_default`, `kick`, `redact`, `state_default`, `users`,
`users_default`.

- `m.room.aliases`[m.room.aliases](/v1.18/client-server-api/#historical-events) allows key `aliases`.

- `m.room.history_visibility`[m.room.history_visibility](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomhistory_visibility) allows
key `history_visibility`.


### Event IDs

An event has exactly one event ID. Event IDs in this room version have the
format:

```
$opaque_id:domain
```


where `domain` is the server name[server name](/v1.18/appendices/#server-name) of the homeserver
which created the room, and `opaque_id` is a locally-unique string.

The domain is used only for namespacing to avoid the risk of clashes of
identifiers between different homeservers. There is no implication that the
room or event in question is still available at the corresponding homeserver.

### Event format

Events in rooms of this version have the following structure:

# 
 `Persistent Data Unit`


---

A persistent data unit (event) for room versions 1 and 2.

Persistent Data Unit
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 | Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `auth_events` | `[[string\|Event HashEvent Hash]]` | **Required: **Event IDs and reference hashes for the authorization events that would allow this event to be in the room. Must contain less than or equal to 10 events. Note that if the relevant auth event selection rules are used, this restriction should never be encountered. |
| `content` | `object` | **Required: **The content of the event. |
| `depth` | `integer` | **Required: **The maximum depth of the `prev_events`, plus one. Must be less than the maximum value for an integer (2^63 - 1). If the room’s depth is already at the limit, the depth must be set to the limit. |
| `event_id` | `string` | **Required: **The event ID for the PDU. |
| `hashes` | `Event HashEvent Hash` | **Required: **Content hashes of the PDU, following the algorithm specified in Signing Events[Signing Events](/v1.18/server-server-api/#signing-events). |
| `origin_server_ts` | `integer` | **Required: **Timestamp in milliseconds on origin homeserver when this event was created. |
| `prev_events` | `[[string\|Event HashEvent Hash]]` | **Required: **Event IDs and reference hashes for the most recent events in the room that the homeserver was aware of when it made this event. Must contain less than or equal to 20 events. |
| `redacts` | `string` | For redaction events, the ID of the event being redacted. |
| `room_id` | `string` | **Required: **Room identifier. |
| `sender` | `string` | **Required: **The ID of the user sending the event. |
| `signatures` | `{string: {string: string}}` | **Required: **Signatures for the PDU, following the algorithm specified in Signing Events[Signing Events](/v1.18/server-server-api/#signing-events). |
| `state_key` | `string` | If this key is present, the event is a state event, and it will replace previous events with the same `type` and `state_key` in the room state. |
| `type` | `string` | **Required: **Event type |
| `unsigned` | `UnsignedDataUnsignedData` | Additional data added by the origin server but not covered by the `signatures`. |


Event Hash
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 | Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `sha256` | `string` | **Required: **The hash. |


UnsignedData
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 | Name | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `age` | `integer` | The number of milliseconds that have passed since this message was sent. |


## Examples

```
{
  "auth_events": [
    [
      "$af232176:example.org",
      {
        "sha256": "abase64encodedsha256hashshouldbe43byteslong"
      }
    ]
  ],
  "content": {
    "key": "value"
  },
  "depth": 12,
  "event_id": "$a4ecee13e2accdadf56c1025:example.com",
  "hashes": {
    "sha256": "thishashcoversallfieldsincasethisisredacted"
  },
  "origin_server_ts": 1404838188000,
  "prev_events": [
    [
      "$af232176:example.org",
      {
        "sha256": "abase64encodedsha256hashshouldbe43byteslong"
      }
    ]
  ],
  "room_id": "!UcYsUzyxTGDxLBEvLy:example.org",
  "sender": "@alice:example.com",
  "signatures": {
    "example.com": {
      "ed25519:key_version": "these86bytesofbase64signaturecoveressentialfieldsincludinghashessocancheckredactedpdus"
    }
  },
  "type": "m.room.message",
  "unsigned": {
    "age": 4612
  }
}
```


#### Deprecated event content schemas

Events sent into rooms of this version can have formats which are different
from their normal schema. Those cases are documented here.

The behaviour described here is preserved strictly for backwards compatibility
only. A homeserver should take reasonable precautions to prevent users from
sending these so-called “malformed” events, and must never rely on the behaviours
described here as a default.

##### `m.room.power_levels` events accept values as strings

In order to maintain backwards compatibility with early implementations,
each of the integer-valued properties within
`m.room.power_levels`[m.room.power_levels](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroompower_levels) events can
be encoded as strings instead of integers. This includes the nested values
within the `events`, `notifications` and `users` properties.
For example, the following is a valid `m.room.power_levels` event in this room version:

```
{
  "content": {
    "ban": "50",
    "events": {
      "m.room.power_levels": "100"
    },
    "events_default": "0",
    "state_default": "50",
    "users": {
      "@example:localhost": "100"
    },
    "users_default": "0"
  },
  "origin_server_ts": 1432735824653,
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  "sender": "@example:example.org",
  "state_key": "",
  "type": "m.room.power_levels"
}
```


When the value is representative of an integer, they must be the following format:


- a single base 10 integer, no float values or decimal points, optionally with
any number of leading zeroes (`"100"`, `"000100"`);

- optionally prefixed with a single `-` or `+` character before the integer (`"+100"`,
`"-100"`).

- optionally with any number of leading or trailing whitespace characters (`" 100 "`,
`" 00100 "`, `" +100 "`, `" -100 "`);


##### `m.room.power_levels` events accept values as floats

When the value is a float


- First, exponential notation is applied: `5.114698E4` becomes `51146.98`

- Second, the value is truncated at the decimal point: `51146.98` becomes `51146`.


Values outside the range represented by IEE754 binary64 (a “double”) cause the
powerlevel event to be rejected, as do `Infinity`, `-Infinity` and `NaN`.

For example, this is a valid `m.room.power_levels` event in this room version:

```
{
  "content": {
    "ban": 50,
    "events": {
      "m.room.power_levels": 100
    },
    "events_default": 0,
    "state_default": 50,
    "users": {
      "@example:example.org": 100,
      "@alice:localhost": 50,
      "@bob:localhost": 50.57
    },
    "users_default": 0
  },
  "origin_server_ts": 1432735824653,
  "room_id": "!jEsUZKDJdhlrceRyVU:example.org",
  "sender": "@example:example.org",
  "state_key": "",
  "type": "m.room.power_levels"
}
```


In this example, both `@bob:localhost` and `@alice:localhost` have the same effective
power level of `50`, even though the values are technically different.

Note that, since this room version does not enforce that events comply with the requirements
of Canonical JSON[Canonical JSON](/v1.18/appendices/#canonical-json), power levels can be formatted as floats.

### Authorization rules

The types of state events that affect authorization are:


- `m.room.create`[m.room.create](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomcreate)

- `m.room.member`[m.room.member](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroommember)

- `m.room.join_rules`[m.room.join_rules](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomjoin_rules)

- `m.room.power_levels`[m.room.power_levels](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroompower_levels)

- `m.room.third_party_invite`[m.room.third_party_invite](/v1.18/client-server-api/#mroomthird_party_invite)


Power levels are inferred from defaults when not explicitly supplied.
For example, mentions of the `sender`’s power level can also refer to
the default power level for users in the room.

The rules are as follows:


1. If type is `m.room.create`:


  1. If it has any `prev_events`, reject.

  2. If the domain of the `room_id` does not match the domain of the
`sender`, reject.

  3. If `content.room_version` is present and is not a recognised
version, reject.

  4. If `content` has no `creator` property, reject.

  5. Otherwise, allow.


2. Considering the event’s `auth_events`:


  1. 


If there are duplicate entries for a given `type` and `state_key` pair,
reject.


  2. 


If there are entries whose `type` and `state_key` don’t match those
specified by the auth events
selection[auth events
selection](/v1.18/server-server-api/#auth-events-selection)
algorithm described in the server specification, reject.

**Note**: This room version requires an `m.room.create` event to be selected.


  3. 


If there are entries which were themselves rejected under the checks
performed on receipt of a
PDU[checks
performed on receipt of a
PDU](/v1.18/server-server-api/#checks-performed-on-receipt-of-a-pdu), reject.


  4. 


If there is no `m.room.create` event among the entries, reject.


  5. 


If any event in `auth_events` has a `room_id` which does not match that of
the event being authorised, reject.


3. If the `content` of the `m.room.create` event in the room state has the
property `m.federate` set to `false`, and the `sender` domain of the event
does not match the `sender` domain of the create event, reject.

4. If type is `m.room.aliases`:


  1. If event has no `state_key`, reject.

  2. If sender’s domain doesn’t match `state_key`, reject.

  3. Otherwise, allow.


5. If type is `m.room.member`:


  1. If there is no `state_key` property, or no `membership` property in
`content`, reject.

  2. If `membership` is `join`:


    1. If the only previous event is an `m.room.create` and the
`state_key` is the creator, allow.

    2. If the `sender` does not match `state_key`, reject.

    3. If the `sender` is banned, reject.

    4. If the `join_rule` is `invite` then allow if membership
state is `invite` or `join`.

    5. If the `join_rule` is `public`, allow.

    6. Otherwise, reject.


  3. If `membership` is `invite`:


    1. If `content` has a `third_party_invite` property:


      1. If *target user* is banned, reject.

      2. If `content.third_party_invite` does not have a `signed`
property, reject.

      3. If `signed` does not have `mxid` and `token` properties,
reject.

      4. If `mxid` does not match `state_key`, reject.

      5. If there is no `m.room.third_party_invite` event in the
current room state with `state_key` matching `token`,
reject.

      6. If `sender` does not match `sender` of the
`m.room.third_party_invite`, reject.

      7. If any signature in `signed` matches any public key in
the `m.room.third_party_invite` event, allow. The public
keys are in `content` of `m.room.third_party_invite` as:


        1. A single public key in the `public_key` property.

        2. A list of public keys in the `public_keys` property.


      8. Otherwise, reject.


    2. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`,
reject.

    3. If *target user*’s current membership state is `join` or
`ban`, reject.

    4. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to
the *invite level*, allow.

    5. Otherwise, reject.


  4. If `membership` is `leave`:


    1. If the `sender` matches `state_key`, allow if and only if
that user’s current membership state is `invite` or `join`.

    2. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`,
reject.

    3. If the *target user*’s current membership state is `ban`,
and the `sender`’s power level is less than the *ban level*,
reject.

    4. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to
the *kick level*, and the *target user*’s power level is
less than the `sender`’s power level, allow.

    5. Otherwise, reject.


  5. If `membership` is `ban`:


    1. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`,
reject.

    2. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to
the *ban level*, and the *target user*’s power level is less
than the `sender`’s power level, allow.

    3. Otherwise, reject.


  6. Otherwise, the membership is unknown. Reject.


6. If the `sender`’s current membership state is not `join`, reject.

7. If type is `m.room.third_party_invite`:


  1. Allow if and only if `sender`’s current power level is greater
than or equal to the *invite level*.


8. If the event type’s *required power level* is greater than the
`sender`’s power level, reject.

9. If the event has a `state_key` that starts with an `@` and does not
match the `sender`, reject.

10. If type is `m.room.power_levels`:


  1. If the `users` property in `content` is not an object with keys that
are valid user IDs with values that are integers (or a string
that is an integer), reject.

  2. If there is no previous `m.room.power_levels` event in the room,
allow.

  3. For the properties `users_default`, `events_default`, `state_default`,
`ban`, `redact`, `kick`, `invite` check if they were added,
changed or removed. For each found alteration:


    1. If the current value is greater than the `sender`’s current
power level, reject.

    2. If the new value is greater than the `sender`’s current power
level, reject.


  4. For each entry being changed in, or removed from, the `events` property:


    1. If the current value is greater than the `sender`’s current
power level, reject.


  5. For each entry being added to, or changed in, the `events` property:


    1. If the new value is greater than the `sender`’s current power
level, reject.


  6. For each entry being changed in, or removed from, the `users` property,
other than the `sender`’s own entry:


    1. If the current value is greater than or equal to the `sender`’s
current power level, reject.


  7. For each entry being added to, or changed in, the `users` property:


    1. If the new value is greater than the `sender`’s current power
level, reject.


  8. Otherwise, allow.


11. If type is `m.room.redaction`:


  1. If the `sender`’s power level is greater than or equal to the
*redact level*, allow.

  2. If the domain of the `event_id` of the event being redacted is
the same as the domain of the `event_id` of the
`m.room.redaction`, allow.

  3. Otherwise, reject.


12. Otherwise, allow.


Some consequences of these rules:


- Unless you are a member of the room, the only permitted operations
(apart from the initial create/join) are: joining a public room;
accepting or rejecting an invitation to a room.

- To unban somebody, you must have power level greater than or equal
to both the kick *and* ban levels, *and* greater than the target
user’s power level.


### Canonical JSON

Servers MUST NOT strictly enforce the JSON format specified in the
appendices[appendices](/v1.18/appendices/#canonical-json) for the reasons
described there.
